Doc: Add a user section on debug output in CLI tools (#14580)
OSGeo/gdal: doc/source/user/debug.rst

=================================
GDAL CLI Debug and Logging Output
=================================

.. contents::
    :depth: 3

Debug Output
------------

To display GDAL debug output for a command, use the ``--debug`` option.
See :ref:`raster_common_options` and :ref:`vector_common_options` for details on ``--debug``.
The following example enables debug output for :ref:`gdal_vector_info`.

.. code-block:: console

    $ gdal vector info in.gpkg --debug ON

> When ``debug`` is enabled, GDAL writes additional messages to the command output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When ``debug`` is enabled, GDAL writes additional messages to the command error stream.
```

Author: Ah ok, so it writes debug to stderr and the other output (such as progress) to stdout?

Reviewer: > and the other output (such as progress) to stdout?

yes, although I believe there has been discussions in the past if progress should be in stderrr

These messages can help identify issues related to dataset access, driver loading,
configuration options, and processing operations.

Each debug message includes a prefix indicating the component that produced it.
The prefixes typically indicate drivers (e.g. ``Shape``, ``GeoJSON``), tools (e.g. ``GDALVectorTranslate``),
or the core GDAL runtime (``GDAL``).

.. example::
   :title: Convert vector datasets with debug output
   :id: debug-output

    The following example shows debug output with different prefix types.

    .. code-block:: console

>        $ gdal vector convert in.gpkg out.geojson --overwrite --debug ON

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       $ gdal vector convert in.shp out.geojson --overwrite --debug ON
```

Author: I switched my example around a couple of times.. good catch!

       GDAL: GDALOpen(in.shp, this=000001719D0A3D80) succeeds as ESRI Shapefile.
       GeoJSON: First pass: 100.00 %
       GDAL: GDALOpen(out.geojson, this=000001719D0AC240) succeeds as GeoJSON.
       GDAL: GDALClose(out.geojson, this=000001719D0AC240)
       GDAL: Using GeoJSON driver
       GDAL: GDALDriver::Create(GeoJSON,out.geojson,0,0,0,Unknown,0000000000000000)
       0...10...20...30...40...50...60...70...80...90...100 - done.
       GDALVectorTranslate: 19 features written in layer 'in'
       Shape: 19 features read on layer 'in'.

Debug output can be filtered by passing a component prefix to the ``--debug`` option.

> For example, to display only messages from the ``Shape`` driver, use ``--debug Shape``.

Reviewer 2: There isn't necessarily a direct connection between the driver name (here, "ESRI Shapefile") and the prefix passed to `CPLDebug`.

```suggestion
For example, to display only messages beginning with ``Shape:`, use ``--debug Shape``.
```

These are documented in the :ref:`configoptions_logging` section of the config options page.

The options are prefixed with :term:`CPL` ("Common Portability Library"), the internal GDAL utility library used by GDAL core and drivers.

Options can be set per command using the ``--config`` option, or globally using environment variables.
Note that ``--debug ON`` is equivalent to ``--config CPL_DEBUG=ON``.

The following are all broadly equivalent, although environment variables affect all subsequent GDAL commands in the same session, whereas ``--config`` only applies to the current command.

.. tabs::

    .. code-tab:: bash

        $ gdal vector info in.gpkg --debug ON
        $ gdal vector info in.gpkg --config CPL_DEBUG=ON

        # set CPL_DEBUG for the scope of the single command
        $ CPL_DEBUG=ON gdal vector info in.gpkg

        # set CPL_DEBUG for the whole shell session
        $ export CPL_DEBUG=ON
        $ gdal vector info in.gpkg

    .. code-tab:: ps1

        gdal vector info in.gpkg --debug ON
        gdal vector info in.gpkg --config CPL_DEBUG=ON

        # set CPL_DEBUG for the whole shell session
        $env:CPL_DEBUG="ON"
        gdal vector info in.gpkg

> When working with remote datasets, it is often useful to log :term:`curl` output for HTTP requests. This can be done by setting the ``CPL_CURL_VERBOSE`` configuration option to ``ON``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When working with remote datasets, it is often useful to log :term:`curl` output for HTTP requests. This can be done by setting the :config:`CPL_CURL_VERBOSE` configuration option to ``ON``.
```

.. example::
   :title: Get raster information with HTTP request logging enabled
   :id: debug-log-curl

   .. code-block:: console

      $ gdal raster info /vsicurl/https://download.osgeo.org/geotiff/samples/spot/chicago/SP27GTIF.TIF --config CPL_CURL_VERBOSE=ON

> ``CPL_TIMESTAMP`` adds timestamps to each log and debug message emitted by GDAL, which can be useful for troubleshooting performance bottlenecks and benchmarking.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:config:`CPL_TIMESTAMP` adds timestamps to each log and debug message emitted by GDAL, which can be useful for troubleshooting performance bottlenecks and benchmarking.
```

.. example::
   :title: Get raster info with curl logging and timestamps

   .. tabs::

      .. code-tab:: bash

        $ export CPL_CURL_VERBOSE=YES
        $ export CPL_TIMESTAMP=ON

>         $ gdal raster info /vsicurl/https://download.osgeo.org/geotiff/samples/spot/chicago/SP27GTIF.TIF --debug "CURL_INFO_TEXT"

Reviewer 2: Use `--config` rather than `export` here?

Author: Updated to use a mix to environment variables and `--config` (the intention here is to show the user they can use whichever approach works best for them, including a mix)

        [Fri May 15 11:57:24 2026].6370, 0.0000: CURL_INFO_TEXT: Could not find host download.osgeo.org in the .netrc file; using defaults
        [Fri May 15 11:57:24 2026].6640, 0.0270: CURL_INFO_TEXT: Host download.osgeo.org:443 was resolved.

      .. code-tab:: ps1

        $env:CPL_CURL_VERBOSE="YES"
        $env:CPL_TIMESTAMP="ON"
        gdal raster info /vsicurl/https://download.osgeo.org/geotiff/samples/spot/chicago/SP27GTIF.TIF --debug "CURL_INFO_TEXT"

> ``CPL_LOG_ERRORS`` enables logging of error messages through GDAL’s CPL logging system, rather than only reporting them to the terminal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:config:`CPL_LOG_ERRORS` enables logging of error messages through GDAL’s CPL logging system, rather than only reporting them to the terminal.
```

> When combined with ``CPL_LOG``, log output (including errors) can be written to a file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When combined with :config:`CPL_LOG`, log output (including errors) can be written to a file.
```
